CS579: Foundations of Cryptography (Spring 2019)
Homework #1
Instructor: Nikos Triandopoulos
April 3, 2019
Instructions
Please carefully read the following guidelines on how to complete and submit your solutions.
1. The homework is due on Sunday, April 14, 2019, at 11:59pm. Late submissions are
accepted subject to the policy specied in the course syllabus. Starting early always helps!
2. Solutions are accepted only via Canvas, where your answers should be typed (preferably using
LATEX) and submitted as a .pdf le.
3. You are bound by the Stevens Honor System. Collaboration is not allowed for this homework.
You may use any sources related to course materials, but information from external sources
must be properly cited. Your submission acknowledges that you have abided by this policy.
4. This assignment provides a 10% extra credit opportunity!
1
Figure 1: A substitution-cipher ciphertext c.
Figure 2: Histogram of English letters.
Problem 1 (40%)
(1) Provide a formal denition for the mono-alphabetic substitution cipher, or simply substitution
cipher, by describing its message space M and the algorithms Gen, Enc and Dec.
(2) Figure 1 depicts a ciphertext c that has been produced by a substitution cipher. Use the
histogram in Figure 2 to successfully decrypt c to the corresponding plaintext m. What is m?
(3) Show that the substitution cipher is trivial to break when the adversary launches a chosen-
plaintext attack. How much chosen plaintext is needed to recover the entire secret key? What is
the shortest chosen single-message plaintext that you can nd, which is a valid English message
and would successfully recover the key?
(4) Under which conditions, if any, and why, is the substitution cipher perfectly secret?
Problem 2 (20%)
(1) Consider the extension of the One-time Pad cipher, where a ciphertext c is possibly longer than
the plaintext m (and the key k) by one bit, namely, by having algorithm Enc append to m k a 0
or 1, with probability 0:65 or 0:3, respectively. Is this extension a perfectly secret cipher and why?
(2) Based on your answer in the previous question, prove or refute the following statement:
An encryption scheme with message spaceMis perfectly secret if and only if, for every
probability distribution DM over M and every c0; c1 2 C, we have that:
Pr[C = c0] = Pr[C = c1] :
2
Problem 3 (20%)
(1) Show that if 1(n) is a negligible function, then for any positive polynomial p(), the function
2(n) = p(n)  1(n) is also negligible. What does this imply for an attacker that attempts to break
a symmetric cipher by guessing its n-bit secret key k|which is selected by algorithm Gen uniformly
(at random) from all possible keys?
(2) Is (n) negligible, and why, if (a) (n) = n105
2n1=2 or (b) (n) = n􀀀510
105n105 .
Problem 4 (30%)
Consider an encryption scheme  = (Gen; Enc; Dec) that is EAV-secure according to the denition
that has been discussed in class.
(1) What does the condition jm0j = jm1j capture? Does it weaken or strengthen 's security?
(2) Consider the notion of EAV2-security that we get if we remove the above condition jm0j = jm1j,
that is, where in the corresponding security game the adversary A is allowed to choose challenge
messages of arbitrary length for breaking an encryption scheme 0 = (Gen0; Enc0; Dec0) for arbitrary
long massages. Intuitively, 0 is EAV2-secure, if no ecient A can determine cb non-negligibly
better than guessing, even when jm0j 6= jm1j. Show that no EAV2-secure scheme 0 exists.
Hint: First, note that 0 is dened over message space M = f0; 1g, i.e., messages of
arbitrary length. Then, assume that polynomial p() is an upper bound on the time
spent by Enc0 for encrypting a single bit, and consider what happens when A chooses
m0 2 f0; 1g and a random m1 2 f0; 1gp(n)+c, where c  1 a positive integer.
(3) Show that EAV2-security can be achieved by encryption schemes dened over messages up to
a given maximum length, i.e., by schemes 0 such that for k 2 f0; 1gn, algorithm Enc0 is dened
over message space M0 = fm : jmj  `g, where ` , `(n) for some given polynomial `().
Hint: Construct a scheme 0 = (Gen0; Enc0; Dec0) that encrypts messages in M0 by
employing a EAV-secure scheme  = (Gen; Enc; Dec) with message space M. Consider
an algorithm Enc0 that on input message m0 2M0, merely applies Enc on a unique and
inversible encoding m = E(m0) 2Mof m0 in a way that \compensates" for the absence
of the restriction jm0j = jm1j in the original game used to dene EAV-security. Then,
prove that 0 is EAV2-secure via a proof by reduction.
3
